[DOCS] Update API key API (#88499)
elastic/elasticsearch: x-pack/docs/en/rest-api/security/update-api-key.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[security-api-update-api-key]]
=== Update API key API

++++
<titleabbrev>Update API key</titleabbrev>
++++

[[security-api-update-api-key-request]]
==== {api-request-title}

`PUT /_security/api_key/<id>`

[[security-api-update-api-key-prereqs]]
==== {api-prereq-title}

* To use this API, you must have at least the `manage_own_api_key` cluster privilege.
Users can only update their own API keys, i.e., API keys they created.
To update another user's API key, you must use the run as feature.

> For more information, see <<run-as-privilege>>.

Author: Flows better, thanks!

IMPORTANT: It's not possible to use an API key as the authentication credential for this API.
To update an API key, user password or <<security-api-get-token, token credentials>> are required.

[[security-api-update-api-key-desc]]
==== {api-description-title}

The API keys created by <<security-api-create-api-key,create API Key>> or <<security-api-grant-api-key,grant API Key>> can be updated using this API.
It's not possible to update expired API keys, or API keys that have been invalidated by <<security-api-invalidate-api-key,invalidate API Key>>.

> This API supports updates to an API key's access scope, i.e., its permissions, and its metadata.

Reviewer: We should also explicitly list the auto-synced properties, especially the owner user's privileges. This makes the following callout more readable.

Author: I considered that as well, and am up for including them.

My reservation is that updating version and creator info is, in a sense, is an implementation detail -- these fields are not exposed via a public API and should be largely opaque to users.

Likewise, "updates to an API key's access scope" _includes_ the auto update to the user perm snapshot.

That said, I think including details about the auto-synced user perms makes a lot of sense. To avoid redundancy, I've tweak the text here as well as the callout. LMKWYT

Other properties such as `name` or `expiration` cannot be updated.

> IMPORTANT: An API key's permissions are always restricted by the permissions of the authenticated user creating or updating the API key.

Author: This callout is likely confusing. Would love your take on it, and more than happy to go over it in detail on Slack or Zoom or here on GH, whichever you prefer.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can focus less on restriction and more on inheritance. For example:

> The API key inherits the permissions of the authenticated user that creates or updates the API key.

Provided that this ^ statement is technically valid.

Author: I like inherit but it loses the following nuance: the API key's permissions are the intersection of the roles a user assigns to it and the user's permissions. "Inherit" seems to imply that the API key simply has the same permissions as the user it inherits from. What we should get across is the API key's permissions are "at most" those of the user.

"Limited by" is another phrase that came to mind but it clashes a bit with a statement further down:

> If you supply role descriptors, the API key's permissions will be the intersection of the supplied permissions and the authenticated user's current permissions, **thereby limiting the API key's access scope**.

I want to reserve using "limiting" to talking about the "assigned" role descriptors limiting the API key's permissions, and so went with "reserved" for the inverse case.

Author: I like the idea of a broader statement here. Essentially what I want to get across is that any call to this API may change the access scope of the API key even if an end-user does not specify any `role_descriptors`. I'll think about how I can keep make the statement broader and possibly move some of the context into the `role_descriptors` sub-section.

> This is because the API key's access scope is <<security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors,derived and updated>> based on a snapshot of the authenticated user's permissions at the time of the request.

Reviewer: I understand `authenticated user` is what we use in the create-api-key page. But I don't think we should stick to it. The "owner user" is what we currently settled with and its usage should be promoted.

> This is because the API key's access scope is <<security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors,derived and updated>> based on a snapshot of the authenticated user's permissions at the time of the request.

Author: I've addressed this in combination with @ywangd's [comment](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/88499#discussion_r922947063).

[[security-api-update-api-key-path-params]]
==== {api-path-parms-title}

`id`::
(Required, string) The ID of the API key to be updated.

[[security-api-update-api-key-request-body]]
==== {api-request-body-title}

The request body is optional.

> Following parameters can be specified in it:

Author: Nit but I think it's worth highlighting that the request body is optional altogether.

> Following parameters can be specified in it:

Reviewer 2: I don't think that we need the additional (Optional) tag. What if we changed this to read:

>You can specify the following parameters in the request body, which is optional.

Each of the parameters have an (Optional) tag already, so I think that this statement highlights that the entire request body is optional without explicitly including an additional tag.

> Following parameters can be specified in it:

Reviewer 2: I don't think that we need the additional (Optional) tag. What if we changed this to read:

>You can specify the following parameters in the request body, which is optional.

Each of the parameters have an (Optional) tag already, so I think that this statement highlights that the entire request body is optional without explicitly including an additional tag.

[[security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors]]
`role_descriptors`::
(Optional, array-of-role-descriptor) An array of new role descriptors for this API key.

> This parameter is optional.

Author: I dropped the `array-of-role-descriptor` bit and the `This parameter is optional.` bit (this were copy and paste from the create API key API). I've tweaked the remaining text slightly to better align with my most recent edits.

(Optional, array-of-role-descriptor) An array of new role descriptors for this API key.
This parameter is optional.

> When the parameter is supplied but empty, the API key's new permissions will be the current _point in time snapshot of permissions of the authenticated user_.

Reviewer: If we separate the two following two discussions, it might help make things easier to explain:
1. The API key's effective permission is *always* the intersection of its own privileges and owner user's snapshotted privileges
2. How the privileges can be updated, i.e. a) Always (auto) updating owner user's privileges b) optionally update the key's own privileges. 

Item 2 is what we really care here. But we have to explain 1 because currently we have no overview doc for API keys. We can keep 1 simple to just state the rule is always intersection (no matter how its updated or captured). 

For 2, the tricky bit is the `empty` `role_descriptors` means inherting owner user's privileges. Otherwise, it is not that complicated. So I think we can state the simple rule (optional update) first and leave the special `empty` input as a callout. 

This should let us avoid mentioned things like "previously assigned ..." and not trying to list all combinations.

> When the parameter is supplied but empty, the API key's new permissions will be the current _point in time snapshot of permissions of the authenticated user_.

Author: Absolutely up for simplifying. I provided the "verbose" full context here so that we have the complete picture for discussion and it's easier to talk about what should and shouldn't be included.

> The API key's permissions are a combination of it's privileges, plus the owner user's current permissions at the current time when the request is issued.

Is still a little confusing since we talk about the API key's permissions and the API key's privileges which are only very subtly different (if at all). I think using "assigned permissions" or "assigned privileges" works better here.

> The API key's effective permission is always the intersection of its own privileges and owner user's snapshotted privileges

Is not exactly right since if the assigned privileges are empty, it's not the intersection anymore (it would be empty) so we still need some sort of qualifier here.

What about s.th. like:

> The API key's permissions are an intersection of its assigned privileges, plus the owner user's current permissions at the time the request is issued. If no privileges are assigned, the API key has the owner user's full current permissions.

> When the parameter is supplied but empty, the API key's new permissions will be the current _point in time snapshot of permissions of the authenticated user_.

Author: > However, I think that we need an example to clarify and solidify this statement.

What if we link to the example requests further down? I've intentionally included examples that highlight the nuances of this.

The structure of the role descriptor is the same as the request for the create role API.
For more details, see <<security-api-put-role, create or update roles API>>.

`metadata`::
(Optional, object) Arbitrary metadata that you want to associate with the API key.
It supports nested data structure.

> Within the `metadata` object, keys beginning with `_` are reserved for system usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the `metadata` object, top level keys beginning with `_` are reserved for system usage.
```

When specified, this fully replaces metadata previously associated with the API key.

[[security-api-update-api-key-response-body]]
==== {api-response-body-title}

`updated`::

> (boolean) `true` if the API key was updated, `false` if the API key did not change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(boolean) `true` if the API key was updated, `false` if the API key did not change (because no change is needed).
```

// TESTRESPONSE[s/ui2lp2axTNmsyakw9tvNnw/$body.api_key/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/VnVhQ2ZHY0JDZGJrUW0tZTVhT3g6dWkybHAyYXhUTm1zeWFrdzl0dk5udw==/$body.encoded/]

For the examples below, assume that the authenticated user's permissions are:

[[security-api-update-api-key-examples-user-permissions]]
[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "cluster": ["all"],
  "index": [
    {
      "names": ["*"],
      "privileges": ["all"]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

The following example updates the API key created above, assigning it new role descriptors and metadata:

[source,console]
----
PUT /_security/api_key/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx
{
  "role_descriptors": {
    "role-a": {
      "index": [
        {
          "names": ["*"],
          "privileges": ["write"]
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "metadata": {
    "environment": {
       "level": 2,
       "trusted": true,
       "tags": ["production"]
    }
  }
}
----
// TEST[s/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx/\${body.id}/]
// TEST[continued]

A successful call returns a JSON structure indicating that the API key was updated:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "updated": true
}
----

> The API key's effective permissions after the update will be the intersection of the supplied role descriptors and the <<security-api-update-api-key-examples-user-permissions, authenticated user's permissions>>:

Reviewer: This and below are largely trying to explain how API key's permission is an intersection. Given how dense they are and its importance, we might want just add a basic version of intro page for API keys and have this explain over there. The API itself is not a great place for explain this concept. WDYT? Also @lockewritesdocs

Reviewer: My idea was to have a "basic" overview doc page, not "explaining in greater detail". That said, it's probably hard to come up with a "basic" yet sufficient overview. I also agree it's outside of the scope for this PR.

Reviewer 2: +1 for including this information for now so that we have it somewhere. We can move it in a subsequent PR for creating an overview of API keys. Thanks @n1v0lg!

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "index": [
    {
      "names": ["*"],
      "privileges": ["write"]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

The following example updates the API key, replacing the API key's assigned permissions with the <<security-api-update-api-key-examples-user-permissions, authenticated user's>>:

[source,console]
----
PUT /_security/api_key/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx
{
  "role_descriptors": {}
}
----

> // TEST[skip:api key id not available anymore]

Author: We might be able to work around this, but settling for this for now. Might revisit in a follow up PR.

  "api_key": "ui2lp2axTNmsyakw9tvNnw",
  "encoded": "VnVhQ2ZHY0JDZGJrUW0tZTVhT3g6dWkybHAyYXhUTm1zeWFrdzl0dk5udw=="
}
--------------------------------------------------
// TESTRESPONSE[s/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx/$body.id/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/ui2lp2axTNmsyakw9tvNnw/$body.api_key/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/VnVhQ2ZHY0JDZGJrUW0tZTVhT3g6dWkybHAyYXhUTm1zeWFrdzl0dk5udw==/$body.encoded/]

For the examples below, assume that the authenticated user's permissions are:

[[security-api-update-api-key-examples-user-permissions]]
[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "cluster": ["all"],
  "index": [
    {
      "names": ["*"],
      "privileges": ["all"]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

The following example updates the API key created above, assigning it new role descriptors and metadata:

[source,console]
----
PUT /_security/api_key/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx
{
  "role_descriptors": {
    "role-a": {
      "index": [
        {
          "names": ["*"],
          "privileges": ["write"]
        }
      ]
    }
  },
  "metadata": {
    "environment": {
       "level": 2,
       "trusted": true,
       "tags": ["production"]
    }
  }
}
----

> // TEST[s/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx/\${body.id}/]

Author: Turns out I was missing a `\` in my attempts to get this to work. Thanks @ywangd for figuring this out 🚀

to submit a request on behalf of another user.

IMPORTANT: It's not possible to use an API key as the authentication credential for this API.
To update an API key, the owner user's credentials are required.

[[security-api-update-api-key-desc]]
==== {api-description-title}

Use this API to update API keys created by the <<security-api-create-api-key,create API Key>> or <<security-api-grant-api-key,grant API Key>> APIs.
It's not possible to update expired API keys, or API keys that have been invalidated by <<security-api-invalidate-api-key,invalidate API Key>>.

This API supports updates to an API key's access scope, i.e., its permissions, and its metadata.
The access scope of an API key is derived from the <<security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors,`role_descriptors`>> you specify in the request, and a snapshot of the owner user's permissions at the time of the request.
The snapshot of the owner's permissions is updated automatically on every call.

[IMPORTANT]
====
A call to this API might change the API key's access scope, even if you don't specify new
<<security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors,`role_descriptors`>> in the request.

> This behavior can occur if the owner user's permissions have changed since the creation or last update to the API key.

Author: Instead of "creation or last update" could also go with "last modification of the API key".

The preceding paragraph now explains that the snapshot is auto-updated so I've removed the now redundant explanation from the callout.

[role="xpack"]
[[security-api-update-api-key]]
=== Update API key API

++++
<titleabbrev>Update API key</titleabbrev>
++++

[[security-api-update-api-key-request]]
==== {api-request-title}

`PUT /_security/api_key/<id>`

[[security-api-update-api-key-prereqs]]
==== {api-prereq-title}

* To use this API, you must have at least the `manage_own_api_key` cluster privilege.
Users can only update API keys that they created or that were granted to them.
To update another user's API key, use the <<run-as-privilege,`run_as` feature>>
to submit a request on behalf of another user.

IMPORTANT: It's not possible to use an API key as the authentication credential for this API.
To update an API key, the owner user's credentials are required.

[[security-api-update-api-key-desc]]
==== {api-description-title}

Use this API to update API keys created by the <<security-api-create-api-key,create API Key>> or <<security-api-grant-api-key,grant API Key>> APIs.
It's not possible to update expired API keys, or API keys that have been invalidated by <<security-api-invalidate-api-key,invalidate API Key>>.

> This API supports updates to an API key's access scope, i.e., its permissions, and its metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This API supports updates to an API key's access scope, such as its permissions and metadata.
```

Author: Sorry for the confusing wording/punctuation on my part. I meant this to read as:

> This API supports updates to: 1. an API key's access scope, i.e., its permissions; and 2. its metadata.

I don't mind ditching the i.e. part and making this:

> This API supports updates to an API key's access scope and metadata.

Reviewer 2: +1 to that change

> The access scope of an API key is derived from the <<security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors,`role_descriptors`>> you specify in the request, and a snapshot of the owner user's permissions at the time of the request.

Reviewer: We can be more explicit here. Instead of saying "is derived", we can just say "is an intersection of ...".

Author: I don't think "intersection of" is technically correct here without the disclaimer that when `role_descriptors` is empty (or not assigned) it's not the intersection. I went for "derived" because it side-steps that problem, and references the role desc section where we accurately describe how the permissions are derived.

The snapshot of the owner's permissions is updated automatically on every call.

[IMPORTANT]
====
A call to this API might change the API key's access scope, even if you don't specify new
<<security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors,`role_descriptors`>> in the request.

> This behavior can occur if the owner user's permissions have changed since the last modification of the API key.

Reviewer: My attempt to cover both creation and update:
```suggestion
It can occur if the owner user's permissions have changed and are different from the snapshot version stored as part of the API key.
```

Author: What about "have changed since the creation or last modification of the API key"? It keeps things more high level, without going into detail about the snapshot.

Alternatively:

"can occur if the snapshot of the owner permissions on the API key is stale, i.e., the owner permissions have since diverged (changed?)."

Reviewer 2: What if we flipped this statement to move the conditional part about `role_descriptors` to the end? I think that moving the explanation of why this can occur helps to clarify the initial sentence:

>A call to this API might change the API key's access scope, which can occur if the owner user's
>permissions have changed since the API key was created or last modified. This change can occur
>even if you don't specify new <<security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors,`role_descriptors`>> in the request.

Author: I like it. Thanks!

Author: Discussed on slack, and going with a different tweak which keeps the callout specific to the "access change despite omitted role descriptors" issue.

====

[[security-api-update-api-key-path-params]]
==== {api-path-parms-title}

`id`::
(Required, string) The ID of the API key to update.

[[security-api-update-api-key-request-body]]
==== {api-request-body-title}
(Optional)

You can specify the following optional parameters in the request body.

[[security-api-update-api-key-api-key-role-descriptors]]
`role_descriptors`::

> (Optional, array) An array of role descriptors to assign to this API key.

Reviewer: This is technically incorrect because this parameter does not accept array, but must be an object. Create API Key page has the same issue.

Author: Indeed, forgot to comment on this. Thanks for flagging! I can change this to `(Optional, object) The role descriptors to assigned to this API key` and likewise tweak the create and grant docs.

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "index": [
    {
      "names": ["*"],
      "privileges": ["write"]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

The following example removes the API key's previously assigned permissions.

[source,console]
----
PUT /_security/api_key/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx
{
  "role_descriptors": {}
}
----
// TEST[skip:api key id not available anymore]

Which returns the response:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "updated": true
}
----

The API key's effective permissions after the update will the same as the <<security-api-update-api-key-examples-user-permissions, owner user's>>:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  "cluster": ["all"],
  "index": [
    {
      "names": ["*"],
      "privileges": ["all"]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

For the next example, assume that the owner user's permissions have changed from <<security-api-update-api-key-examples-user-permissions, the original permissions>> to:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
{

>   "cluster": ["manage_own_api_key"],

Reviewer: Nit:
Can we use `manage_security` instead of `manage_own_api_key`? I am worried that too many `api_key` is confusing at times.

  "index": [
    {
      "names": ["*"],
      "privileges": ["read"]
    }
  ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

The following request auto-updates the snapshot of the user's permissions associated with the API key:

[source,console]
----
PUT /_security/api_key/VuaCfGcBCdbkQm-e5aOx
----
// TEST[skip:api key id not available anymore]

Which returns the response:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "updated": true
}
----

> Resulting in the following permissions for the API key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resulting in the following effective permissions for the API key:
```

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
{

>   "cluster": ["manage_own_api_key"],

Reviewer: Same here: can we replace it with `manage_security`?
